docs/root/configuration/http/http_filters/oauth2_filter.rst, before:


.. _config_http_filters_oauth:

OAuth2
======

* This filter should be configured with the type URL ``type.googleapis.com/envoy.extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2``.
* :ref:`v3 API reference <envoy_v3_api_msg_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2>`

The OAuth filter's flow involves:

* An unauthenticated user arrives at myapp.com, and the oauth filter redirects them to the
  :ref:`authorization_endpoint <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.authorization_endpoint>`
  for login. The :ref:`client_id <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.client_id>`
  and the :ref:`redirect_uri <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.redirect_uri>`
  are sent as query string parameters in this first redirect.
* After a successful login, the authn server should be configured to redirect the user back to the
  :ref:`redirect_uri <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.redirect_uri>`
  provided in the query string in the first step. In the below code example, we choose /callback as the configured match path.
  An "authorization grant" is included in the query string for this second redirect.
* Using this new grant and the :ref:`token_secret <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.token_secret>`,
  the filter then attempts to retrieve an access token from
  the :ref:`token_endpoint <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.token_endpoint>`. The filter knows it has to do this
  instead of reinitiating another login because the incoming request has a path that matches the
  :ref:`redirect_path_matcher <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.redirect_path_matcher>` criteria.
* Upon receiving an access token, the filter sets cookies so that subseqeuent requests can skip the full
  flow. These cookies are calculated using the
  :ref:`hmac_secret <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.hmac_secret>`
  to assist in encoding.
* The filter calls ``continueDecoding()`` to unblock the filter chain.
* The filter sets ``IdToken`` and ``RefreshToken`` cookies if they are provided by Identity provider along with ``AccessToken``.

When the authn server validates the client and returns an authorization token back to the OAuth filter,
no matter what format that token is, if
:ref:`forward_bearer_token <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.forward_bearer_token>`
is set to true the filter will send over a
cookie named ``BearerToken`` to the upstream. Additionally, the ``Authorization`` header will be populated
with the same value.

.. note::
  By default, OAuth2 filter sets some cookies with the following names:
  ``BearerToken``, ``OauthHMAC``, and ``OauthExpires``. These cookie names can be customized by
  setting
  :ref:`cookie_names <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.cookie_names>`.

.. attention::

  The OAuth2 filter is currently under active development.

Example configuration
---------------------

The following is an example configuring the filter.

.. validated-code-block:: yaml
  :type-name: envoy.extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2

  config:
    token_endpoint:
      cluster: oauth
      uri: oauth.com/token
      timeout: 3s
    authorization_endpoint: https://oauth.com/oauth/authorize/
    redirect_uri: "%REQ(x-forwarded-proto)%://%REQ(:authority)%/callback"
    redirect_path_matcher:
      path:
        exact: /callback
    signout_path:
      path:
        exact: /signout
    credentials:
      client_id: foo
      token_secret:
        name: token
        sds_config:
          path: "/etc/envoy/token-secret.yaml"
      hmac_secret:
        name: hmac
        sds_config:
          path: "/etc/envoy/hmac.yaml"
    # (Optional): defaults to 'user' scope if not provided
    auth_scopes:
    - user
    - openid
    - email
    # (Optional): set resource parameter for Authorization request
    resources:
    - oauth2-resource
    - http://example.com

Below is a complete code example of how we employ the filter as one of
:ref:`HttpConnectionManager HTTP filters
<envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.network.http_connection_manager.v3.HttpConnectionManager.http_filters>`

.. validated-code-block:: yaml
  :type-name: envoy.config.bootstrap.v3.Bootstrap

  static_resources:
    listeners:
    - name: listener_0
      address:
        socket_address:
          protocol: TCP
          address: 127.0.0.1
          port_value: 10000
      filter_chains:
      - filters:
        - name: envoy.filters.network.http_connection_manager
          typed_config:
            "@type": type.googleapis.com/envoy.extensions.filters.network.http_connection_manager.v3.HttpConnectionManager
            http_filters:
            - name: envoy.filters.http.oauth2
              typed_config:
                "@type": type.googleapis.com/envoy.extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2
                config:
                  token_endpoint:
                    cluster: oauth
                    uri: oauth.com/token
                    timeout: 3s
                  authorization_endpoint: https://oauth.com/oauth/authorize/
                  redirect_uri: "%REQ(x-forwarded-proto)%://%REQ(:authority)%/callback"
                  redirect_path_matcher:
                    path:
                      exact: /callback
                  signout_path:
                    path:
                      exact: /signout
                  credentials:
                    client_id: foo
                    token_secret:
                      name: token
                      sds_config:
                        path: "/etc/envoy/token-secret.yaml"
                    hmac_secret:
                      name: hmac
                      sds_config:
                        path: "/etc/envoy/hmac.yaml"
                  # (Optional): defaults to 'user' scope if not provided
                  auth_scopes:
                  - user
                  - openid
                  - email
                  # (Optional): set resource parameter for Authorization request
                  resources:
                  - oauth2-resource
                  - http://example.com
            - name: envoy.router
              typed_config:
                "@type": type.googleapis.com/envoy.extensions.filters.http.router.v3.Router
            tracing: {}
            codec_type: "AUTO"
            stat_prefix: ingress_http
            route_config:
              virtual_hosts:
              - name: service
                domains: ["*"]
                routes:
                - match:
                    prefix: "/"
                  route:
                    cluster: service
                    timeout: 5s

    clusters:
    - name: service
      connect_timeout: 5s
      type: STATIC
      lb_policy: ROUND_ROBIN
      load_assignment:
        cluster_name: service
        endpoints:
        - lb_endpoints:
          - endpoint:
              address:
                socket_address:
                  address: 127.0.0.1
                  port_value: 8080
    - name: oauth
      connect_timeout: 5s
      type: LOGICAL_DNS
      lb_policy: ROUND_ROBIN
      load_assignment:
        cluster_name: oauth
        endpoints:
        - lb_endpoints:
          - endpoint:
              address:
                socket_address:
                  address: auth.example.com
                  port_value: 443
      transport_socket:
        name: envoy.transport_sockets.tls
        typed_config:
          "@type": type.googleapis.com/envoy.extensions.transport_sockets.tls.v3.UpstreamTlsContext
          sni: auth.example.com

Finally, the following code block illustrates sample contents inside a yaml file containing both credential secrets.
Both the :ref:`token_secret <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.token_secret>`
and the :ref:`hmac_secret <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.hmac_secret>`
can be defined in one shared file.

.. code-block:: yaml

  static_resources:
    secrets:
    - name: token
      generic_secret:
        secret: <Your token secret here>
    - name: hmac
      generic_secret:
        secret: <Your hmac secret here>


Notes
-----

When enabled, the OAuth filter does not protect against Cross-Site-Request-Forgery attacks on domains with
cached authentication (in the form of cookies).
It is recommended to pair this filter with the :ref:`CSRF Filter <envoy_v3_api_msg_extensions.filters.http.csrf.v3.CsrfPolicy>`
to prevent malicious social engineering.

The service must be served over HTTPS for this filter to work properly, as the cookies use ``;secure``. Without https, your
:ref:`authorization_endpoint <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.authorization_endpoint>`
provider will likely reject the incoming request, and your access cookies will not be cached to bypass future logins.

The signout path will redirect the current user to '/', and clear all authentication cookies related to
the HMAC validation. Consequently, the OAuth filter will then restart the full OAuth flow at the root path,
sending the user to the configured auth endpoint.

:ref:`pass_through_matcher <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.pass_through_matcher>` provides
an interface for users to provide specific header matching criteria such that, when applicable, the OAuth flow is entirely skipped.
When this occurs, the ``oauth_success`` metric is still incremented.

Generally, allowlisting is inadvisable from a security standpoint.

Statistics
----------

The OAuth2 filter outputs statistics in the *<stat_prefix>.* namespace.

.. csv-table::
  :header: Name, Type, Description
  :widths: 1, 1, 2

  oauth_failure, Counter, Total requests that were denied.
  oauth_success, Counter, Total requests that were allowed.
  oauth_unauthorization_rq, Counter, Total unauthorized requests.

Commit message:

outh2: passthrough of authorization header when filter is matched (#23489)
Authorization header sanitation altered headers before the passthrough evaluation.
Therefore, move of passthrough header matching to the beginning if the header evaluation,
so the unaltered request is passed through.
Introduces a new metric: oauth_passthrough counter.

Signed-off-by: Timo Haas <haastimo@gmx.de>
(cherry picked from commit f52f99e8617ea534e4d074533c3879d7d51d8d14)

docs/root/configuration/http/http_filters/oauth2_filter.rst, after:


.. _config_http_filters_oauth:

OAuth2
======

* This filter should be configured with the type URL ``type.googleapis.com/envoy.extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2``.
* :ref:`v3 API reference <envoy_v3_api_msg_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2>`

The OAuth filter's flow involves:

* An unauthenticated user arrives at myapp.com, and the oauth filter redirects them to the
  :ref:`authorization_endpoint <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.authorization_endpoint>`
  for login. The :ref:`client_id <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.client_id>`
  and the :ref:`redirect_uri <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.redirect_uri>`
  are sent as query string parameters in this first redirect.
* After a successful login, the authn server should be configured to redirect the user back to the
  :ref:`redirect_uri <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.redirect_uri>`
  provided in the query string in the first step. In the below code example, we choose /callback as the configured match path.
  An "authorization grant" is included in the query string for this second redirect.
* Using this new grant and the :ref:`token_secret <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.token_secret>`,
  the filter then attempts to retrieve an access token from
  the :ref:`token_endpoint <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.token_endpoint>`. The filter knows it has to do this
  instead of reinitiating another login because the incoming request has a path that matches the
  :ref:`redirect_path_matcher <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.redirect_path_matcher>` criteria.
* Upon receiving an access token, the filter sets cookies so that subseqeuent requests can skip the full
  flow. These cookies are calculated using the
  :ref:`hmac_secret <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.hmac_secret>`
  to assist in encoding.
* The filter calls ``continueDecoding()`` to unblock the filter chain.
* The filter sets ``IdToken`` and ``RefreshToken`` cookies if they are provided by Identity provider along with ``AccessToken``.

When the authn server validates the client and returns an authorization token back to the OAuth filter,
no matter what format that token is, if
:ref:`forward_bearer_token <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.forward_bearer_token>`
is set to true the filter will send over a
cookie named ``BearerToken`` to the upstream. Additionally, the ``Authorization`` header will be populated
with the same value.

.. note::
  By default, OAuth2 filter sets some cookies with the following names:
  ``BearerToken``, ``OauthHMAC``, and ``OauthExpires``. These cookie names can be customized by
  setting
  :ref:`cookie_names <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.cookie_names>`.

.. attention::

  The OAuth2 filter is currently under active development.

Example configuration
---------------------

The following is an example configuring the filter.

.. validated-code-block:: yaml
  :type-name: envoy.extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2

  config:
    token_endpoint:
      cluster: oauth
      uri: oauth.com/token
      timeout: 3s
    authorization_endpoint: https://oauth.com/oauth/authorize/
    redirect_uri: "%REQ(x-forwarded-proto)%://%REQ(:authority)%/callback"
    redirect_path_matcher:
      path:
        exact: /callback
    signout_path:
      path:
        exact: /signout
    credentials:
      client_id: foo
      token_secret:
        name: token
        sds_config:
          path: "/etc/envoy/token-secret.yaml"
      hmac_secret:
        name: hmac
        sds_config:
          path: "/etc/envoy/hmac.yaml"
    # (Optional): defaults to 'user' scope if not provided
    auth_scopes:
    - user
    - openid
    - email
    # (Optional): set resource parameter for Authorization request
    resources:
    - oauth2-resource
    - http://example.com

Below is a complete code example of how we employ the filter as one of
:ref:`HttpConnectionManager HTTP filters
<envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.network.http_connection_manager.v3.HttpConnectionManager.http_filters>`

.. validated-code-block:: yaml
  :type-name: envoy.config.bootstrap.v3.Bootstrap

  static_resources:
    listeners:
    - name: listener_0
      address:
        socket_address:
          protocol: TCP
          address: 127.0.0.1
          port_value: 10000
      filter_chains:
      - filters:
        - name: envoy.filters.network.http_connection_manager
          typed_config:
            "@type": type.googleapis.com/envoy.extensions.filters.network.http_connection_manager.v3.HttpConnectionManager
            http_filters:
            - name: envoy.filters.http.oauth2
              typed_config:
                "@type": type.googleapis.com/envoy.extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2
                config:
                  token_endpoint:
                    cluster: oauth
                    uri: oauth.com/token
                    timeout: 3s
                  authorization_endpoint: https://oauth.com/oauth/authorize/
                  redirect_uri: "%REQ(x-forwarded-proto)%://%REQ(:authority)%/callback"
                  redirect_path_matcher:
                    path:
                      exact: /callback
                  signout_path:
                    path:
                      exact: /signout
                  credentials:
                    client_id: foo
                    token_secret:
                      name: token
                      sds_config:
                        path: "/etc/envoy/token-secret.yaml"
                    hmac_secret:
                      name: hmac
                      sds_config:
                        path: "/etc/envoy/hmac.yaml"
                  # (Optional): defaults to 'user' scope if not provided
                  auth_scopes:
                  - user
                  - openid
                  - email
                  # (Optional): set resource parameter for Authorization request
                  resources:
                  - oauth2-resource
                  - http://example.com
            - name: envoy.router
              typed_config:
                "@type": type.googleapis.com/envoy.extensions.filters.http.router.v3.Router
            tracing: {}
            codec_type: "AUTO"
            stat_prefix: ingress_http
            route_config:
              virtual_hosts:
              - name: service
                domains: ["*"]
                routes:
                - match:
                    prefix: "/"
                  route:
                    cluster: service
                    timeout: 5s

    clusters:
    - name: service
      connect_timeout: 5s
      type: STATIC
      lb_policy: ROUND_ROBIN
      load_assignment:
        cluster_name: service
        endpoints:
        - lb_endpoints:
          - endpoint:
              address:
                socket_address:
                  address: 127.0.0.1
                  port_value: 8080
    - name: oauth
      connect_timeout: 5s
      type: LOGICAL_DNS
      lb_policy: ROUND_ROBIN
      load_assignment:
        cluster_name: oauth
        endpoints:
        - lb_endpoints:
          - endpoint:
              address:
                socket_address:
                  address: auth.example.com
                  port_value: 443
      transport_socket:
        name: envoy.transport_sockets.tls
        typed_config:
          "@type": type.googleapis.com/envoy.extensions.transport_sockets.tls.v3.UpstreamTlsContext
          sni: auth.example.com

Finally, the following code block illustrates sample contents inside a yaml file containing both credential secrets.
Both the :ref:`token_secret <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.token_secret>`
and the :ref:`hmac_secret <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Credentials.hmac_secret>`
can be defined in one shared file.

.. code-block:: yaml

  static_resources:
    secrets:
    - name: token
      generic_secret:
        secret: <Your token secret here>
    - name: hmac
      generic_secret:
        secret: <Your hmac secret here>


Notes
-----

When enabled, the OAuth filter does not protect against Cross-Site-Request-Forgery attacks on domains with
cached authentication (in the form of cookies).
It is recommended to pair this filter with the :ref:`CSRF Filter <envoy_v3_api_msg_extensions.filters.http.csrf.v3.CsrfPolicy>`
to prevent malicious social engineering.

The service must be served over HTTPS for this filter to work properly, as the cookies use ``;secure``. Without https, your
:ref:`authorization_endpoint <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.authorization_endpoint>`
provider will likely reject the incoming request, and your access cookies will not be cached to bypass future logins.

The signout path will redirect the current user to '/', and clear all authentication cookies related to
the HMAC validation. Consequently, the OAuth filter will then restart the full OAuth flow at the root path,
sending the user to the configured auth endpoint.

:ref:`pass_through_matcher <envoy_v3_api_field_extensions.filters.http.oauth2.v3.OAuth2Config.pass_through_matcher>` provides
an interface for users to provide specific header matching criteria such that, when applicable, the OAuth flow is entirely skipped.
When this occurs, the ``oauth_passthrough`` metric is incremented but ``success`` is not.

Generally, allowlisting is inadvisable from a security standpoint.

Statistics
----------

The OAuth2 filter outputs statistics in the *<stat_prefix>.* namespace.

.. csv-table::
  :header: Name, Type, Description
  :widths: 1, 1, 2

  oauth_failure, Counter, Total requests that were denied.
  oauth_passthrough, Counter, Total request that matched a passthrough header.
  oauth_success, Counter, Total requests that were allowed.
  oauth_unauthorization_rq, Counter, Total unauthorized requests.
